---
published: published
layout: post
category: Software
title: Using your phone as a Webcam on Windows and Android
---

What with covid-19, a lot of people are remoting and not a lot of people have
webcams. But everybody's got a smartphone. So here's a guide on how to use your
smartphone as a webcam with Android an Windows over wifi.

This is pretty adminny. If you're not comfy with that you might need to look at
other approaches.

**Note that none of the software I'm recommending in this guide is open-source.
I cannot guarantee that the software discussed below has no malicious secret
intent.**

<!--excerpt-->

Before I get into the details: if you don't like my guide there is also [the
official guide](http://ip-webcam.appspot.com/static/doc.html) from the developer
of the tools I'm describing.

## Setting up your phone as a server

First, you need to get your Android phone onto a static IP. So go to Settings ->
About -> Status to find your Wi-fi MAC address, and in your router's DHCP/LAN
settings, you need to bind that address to a fixed IP. Also take note of _which_
wifi network your phone lives on, if you have more than one in your home or
workplace.

Next, you need to install [IP
Webcam](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.pas.webcam&hl=en_CA)
on your android phone. This turns your phone into a video server - which is why
it needs a static IP. Run IP Webcam.

### Recommended settings:

- IP WEBCAM SETTINGS -> Video Preferences
  - Set the "main" camera to the front-facing camera. I know the rear-camera is
    better but this is just easier to set up.
  - Set the "Video Resolution" to 640x480 or lower. I found performance problems
    at higher resolution.
- CONNECTION SETTINGS -> Local Broadcasting
  - Set a Login and Password.
  - I'm assuming your network is secure so we're not going to fuss with SSL, I
    couldn't make SSL work.
    - Just to be safe, don't get naked in front of your phone while it's running
      the server

### Notes on "run in background":

IP WebCam has the option to run in background, but I found the notification icon
that indicates this is happening easy-to-miss and so it would be very easy to
accidentally leave it broadcasting your life. It does save power because you can
shut down the video view and do other things while it's streaming, but I
recommend not using it. If power is a problem, get a power-cable for your
computer desk.

### Starting it up

Now that your settings are confirmed, click "start server". It will show the
live video from your phoen that it is broadcasting, along with the address if
the webserver your phone is running - eg http://192.168.1.X:8080. Note that this
is _not_ the address of the raw stream, but of a website you can use to
configure your device. Feel free to hit that address with your browser to try
it.

The actual video feed lives at http://192.168.1.X:8080/video. Note the /video
directory. It's over HTTP, so again you can hit it with your browser. You'll be
prompted for username and password.

Leave the server running while we set up the client.

## Setting up your Windows PC as a client

First, confirm that your Windows PC is on the same WiFi network as your phone.

Now we install the client software. We're using [IP Camera
Adapter](https://ip-webcam.appspot.com/) which will allow you to connect your
Windows PC to the HTTP videostream and use it as a webcam.

Install the software. When completed, open the app "Configure IP Camera Adapter"
that is now present in your start menu.

Then:

1. Type in the camera feed URL - remember this is the one that ends in "/video".
   So in total it should be something like http://192.168.1.X:8080/video . 
   
2. Key in your username and password.

3. Click "Autodetect" - this will test our connection to your phone and read in
   its resolution. It should match whatever you set back in the server setup
   step.
   
4. OK.

Now use your video-chat program of choice's "video test" tool to confirm it
works.

Did it work? Yay!

No? You're on your own, bud.

## Workflow

I find it best to keep my video stream _off_ and just keep the button to turn my
phone into a camera on my phone's home-screen. You will see a wierd backwards
text in your video-feed if your computer cannot reach the phone. So when a
videochat starts, I open the app, scroll to the bottom and click "start", and
then put my phone in place to work as a camera.

Remember that the camera mode does run down the battery, so it may be handy to
have a charge-cable near whatever cradle-like setup you've rigged for your phone
at your desk.
