---
published: published
layout: post
category: HamOnt
title: Council and the Integrity Commissioner
---

Okay, so let me just make sure I'm getting the latest City of Hamilton council
misadventure straight.  It's been hard to keep track of this overlaid in all the
pandemic pandemonium.  

**edit (2020-10-12)**: Thanks to Ryan McGreal for helping me out with some details.

Cameron Kroetsch is a local activist who is an unpaid volunteer on the city's
LGBT advisory committee.  He's butt heads with the city before, like when said
the city shouldn't fly the rainbow flag during Pride because they hadn't really
stood up for the city's LGBT community properly. This attitude of his was
vindicated when the police failed to protect the Gage park pride event from
violent homophobic activists, despite (according to Kroetsch) having been
specifically told exactly where and when to be.  The police defend this because
Pride's leadership had asked the police not to patrol the interior of the event
or set up a recruiting table (the violence was on the edge of the park).

<!--excerpt-->

So Mr. Kroetsch has established that he's willing to fight city hall, for
apparently good reasons. Then you've got the Integrity Commissioner, a lawyer
appointed and paid by council, who is ostensibly supposed to monitor council
misbehavior.  Dozens of reports of such misbehavior have happened, such as
Whitehead browbeating people on and off the council floor, and Merulla using his
office to threaten a woman over a slow shipment... and none of these complaints
rose to needing a report before council.  The I.C. had very little to say when
Councillor Ferguson shoved local independent journalist Joey Coleman after a
heated council session, which can be considered assault.

And there are other goings on, like that a known neo-Nazi leader was working in
the city hall I.T. department and therefore having access to an incredible
amount of sensitive info (he has since been let go).  His position was
apparenlty kept hidden from the public Org Chart.

And like all cities right now, hard questions are being asked about the role of
policing and civilian oversight, especially with the apparent police disinterest
in going after far-right groups such as the yellow-vesters that regularly
protested on the forecourt, even illegally driving a bus into the space. And
finally, a fissure exists between the old, more conservative side of council and
the new, fresher faces on council that are supported by the city's
actively-engaged public activists, with the Mayor desperately trying to be the
dispassionate peacemaker he always is.  Councillor Merulla sees these new
councillors as an NDP-backed "cabal" (one of the three new councillors
previously ran for the NDP). So, with this stage set: Kroetsch penned a motion
in the LGBT Advisory Committee describing the two related problems: that a known
white supremacist extremist was working in city hall, and that an ex-cop had
been appointed to a civilian oversight component of the police board, defeating
the purpose of the oversight.  The motion, which said that City Hall should not
fly the Pride flag, was passed by the LGBT Advisory Committee.  No names were
included in the motion. However, both of these facts were very embarrassing to
city staff. The clerk told Kroetsch *not* to release the document to the public
because it contained private info, and he sent it anyways. [Details of the
document and the redactions are here (thanks Martin
Kuplēns-Ewart)](https://twitter.com/mkuplens/status/1311673941790949378).

![image of Kroetsch document comparing redactions](/images/2020-10-10-integrity-commissioner/Kroetsch-letter-censored-and-original.jpg)

As described in the Twitter thread, looking at the contents of this document, and
the redacted form that the clerk released, I don't see any private information.
Instead, what I see is embarrassing information.  And given the city's
established history of covering up embarrassments like the Red Hill asphalt
report that described slippery conditions that may have led to multiple deaths,
and the report that a sewage valve had accidentally been left open releasing
a river of sewage into Cootes Paradise, the pattern is obvious.

Also, the redactions are pointless since the City itself had published a fully
unredacted version of the motion (complete with names) on the City website,
which is why he disagreed with the Clerk's opposition to him publishing the
redacted version (she wanted an even more redacted version). The I.C. declined to
include this information in the final report.

And suddenly the Integrity Commissioner's role has silently been expanded to
cover committees, not just council, with no apparent justification or
documentation of this change.  And then instead of the dozens of complaints
against council-members, a complaint against Kroetsch jumps the queue.  On the
council floor, the claim is that Kroetsch ignored an order from the clerk to
respect privacy and not issue the document... but the redactions to the document
don't contain PII, they contain *embarrassments*.  And one of these elements in
the document contained an active warning to an at-risk community.

And meanwhile, the police services site listed the very same information - that
an ex-officer was being appointed to this oversight group.  Obviously, context
is everything - it's fine for an ex-cop to be welcomed into a board, as long as
you don't point out that this might be a bad idea. And so the IC agreed with the
clerk, and Council bought the story that Kroetsch should have taken the
obviously-incorrect order from the Clerk, and not sent the document.  And so
council supports the report blaming Kroetsch.  No real consequences, but a
gesture showing that his actions are unacceptable.  Even the new Councillors
support the motion, because Kroetsch went against the clerk, and they don't want
advisory committees doing that.

And now, in the wake of that decision, Councillor Whitehead is threatening other
advisory committees with the attentions of the Integrity Commissioner.

And as if that isn't enough, we have the Mayor now going directly to the
Premier to fight for the controversial Commonwealth Games without council
direction to do so.  Isn't this exactly the kind of oversight and guidance the
I.C. is supposed to respond to?  But again the I.C. says nothing.

And in the midst of all this, the mayor is saying that this is all fine.  That,
in all of this lunacy, this council really isn't any worse than its
predecessors.  Everything Is Fine.

In light of all this, I'm sending the following letter to council:

# My letter

Hamilton City Councilmembers,

With COVID and Trump dominating the news, it's difficult to keep track of
Council goings-on, but what I've heard about council and the integrity
commissioner is very concerning.

When the civilian oversight of the police board is being undermined, and known
white nationalist extremist leader was working at city hall, Cameron Kroetsch
tried to inform the public of legitimate serious concerns, in a fashion that,
examining the document, is very respectful of privacy.  The same information was
publicized freely elsewhere, and in greater detail.

![image of Kroetsch document comparing redactions](/images/2020-10-10-integrity-commissioner/Kroetsch-letter-censored-and-original.jpg)

After reviewing the [details of the document and the redactions here (thanks
Martin Kuplēns-Ewart)](https://twitter.com/mkuplens/status/1311673941790949378),
it is impossible to interpret the clerk's actions anything but a cover-up,
rather than a responsible attempt to redact P.I.I. that was *not present in the
document*, but was already available on the city's own website! And this council
has already been plagued by multiple embarrassing cover-ups. But instead of
reaffirming a commitment to transparency, we instead see the council abusing the
role of the I.C.'s office to silence him?  How is there no interest in trying to
be better?  After everything that's happened, I'd think that council would make
at least a cursory effort to be above reproach.

Regardless of how you may feel about Mr. Kroetsch, it seems impossible to
reasonably see him in the wrong on this.  And yet, Council abruptly expanded the
role of the I.C. to cover non-councilmembers and then the case of Mr. Kroetsch
jumped the queue over numerous legitimate claims against councilmembers (and
anybody who follows the Council news on even a cursory basis knows there are
many numerous legitimate complaints about councilmembers' ethics).  What is the
last line of defense here?  What is the responsible way to disclose this
information, to protect the Hamiltonian public?  Because if council is more
committed to cover-ups than justice and community safety, and the clerk and the
I.C. are committed to supporting them, then it looks from the outside like the
entire tree is rotten, and Mr. Kroetsch did the exact right thing in ignoring an
absurd instruction.

The I.C. is being used to remove a pesky thorn from the side of
council. This is blatantly political.

Meanwhile, when the kind of action that is *supposed* to draw the attention of
the I.C. happens, what to we hear?  [Examples are
endless](https://www.chch.com/a-kitchener-business-has-filed-a-complaint-against-hamilton-councillor-sam-merulla/),
but the most recent event is the mayor going to the Premiere to fight for the
controversial Commonwealth games bid without council direction.  Why do we even
have an Integrity Commissioner if the office is simply going to be used as a
mouthpiece for council?

And now councillor Whitehead is using the I.C. to threaten the HCCI - completely
brazenly, in public, on Twitter!  This is the culture of total impunity you've
all created.  I hope you're proud of yourselves.

This term of council has been intensely disappointing because even
councilmembers and a mayor I used to have a great deal of respect for have let
us all down.  Even the councilmembers I didn't really agree with, I appreciated
the diversity of perspectives they brought council.  I can only hope that, at
least for *some* members of council, that this was rash decision where they were
not in full possession of the facts of the case at the time of their vote to
support the I.G.'s report.

Say it ain't so.

Regards,

Martin Zarate

Hamilton Ward 1 Constituent