---
published: published 
layout: post 
category: HamOnt
title: LRT Letter
---

Hamilton City Council is voting on the LRT tomorrow (Wednesday, June 16th).
What follows is a lengthy letter I sent to them.

<!--excerpt-->

Councillors, Mr Mayor,

I'm writing to respectfully ask you to support the Hamilton LRT project. This is
a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for our city - I know this because I've spent
my whole life here in Hamilton, so it's at the very least once in *my* lifetime.

I graduated from Westdale back in 2000, and watched my best and brightest
classmates move on to greater cities for greater things - teaching at Cornell,
working at Google in Seattle, running their own tech company in London... or
move to Brantford and beyond for the kind of housing that we used to be able to
afford in Hamilton.

And I look at my kids and see them growing up in a city that is losing the
ambition that used to be its slogan.  Are my children going to be faced with
leaving Hamilton for greener pastures too?  We bent over backwards for Bob Young
to keep the Ti-cats in Hamilton, is it too much to ask that my kids get the same
consideration?

The LRT is a transformative change for Hamilton - a chance to redirect the slow
conversion into yet another GTA suburb back to becoming a destination of its
own.  You've all traveled to see great cities of the world just like I have, and
you've all seen how great cities aren't ones where the poor have cars, but ones
where the rich take transit.  Right now, the HSR is predominantly occupied by
either idealists like me or, more frequently, people without an alternative (eg,
students).  The LRT will change that, and I'm sure you've all seen that yourself
in every rail-based transit you've been on, just as I have.

And from an environmentalist perspective, it's irresponsible *not* to work with
a giant electric transit vehicle that will take many gas-burning cars off the
road.  In the endless relitigation of climate change arguments we hear so many
things about the futility of fighting climate change: "even with electric cars,
the batteries made from cobalt mined by slaves!"  Well the LRT runs on a
catenary, not batteries.  "But the tires and roadway are made of petroleum
products!"  Well the LRT runs on rails that can be sustainably maintained.  "But
an E-bus can do most of the same things, and can be re-routed".  Exactly, which
means that the densification and investment will be more suspicious of the
stability of the route.  Would Bay Street in Toronto be the same if Union
Station could be relocated at the drop of a hat?

We have to fight climate change, and beyond being just an electric vehicle, the
LRT attracts intensification, and the dirty secret of environmentalism is that
the simplest way to be greener is to densify.  Green living doesn't look like
Frank Lloyd Wright's Usonian fantasy, it looks like Manhattan.  Looking South,
in spite of California's constant arguing about green infrastructure and
electric cars and green energy, the lowest-carbon-per-capita state in their 50
states remains New York, simply because they have a gigantic city that has the
kind of housing that can be efficiently heated, serviced, and traveled to and
from.  If you can't get people out of their cars, then they drive.  That means
they need parking, which means we need seas of surface parking-lots, which means
everything is spaced further apart, which means the city isn't walkable, which
means transit can't be used, which means *everybody* has to drive, and not
everybody can afford that, and so create choking traffic as everybody is pushed
further and further out, until our only choices are to sprawl out into the
greenbelt with more choking traffic or watch the endless upward march of absurd
million-dollar prices for detached split-level bungalows, because nobody wants
to live without a 2-car garage in a car-commuter city.  Is that your vision for
this city?  Because I honestly don't see an alternative without real,
transformative transit intensification.

It's all one piece.  It's all one big structure, and the LRT is the keystone of
it.  Take that piece out and the future of this city falls apart.  With 400,000
new Canadians coming to Canada every year and housing prices climbing out of
reach, staying as we are isn't an option.  We need to pick a future.

And as a rider, there are so many intangibles that the LRT brings to the table
over comparative bus transit.  Have you ever been on a bus when it has to stop
to allow a disabled person to embark or disembark?  I mean, you can't blame
them, but it's not a fun delay.  An LRT solves this by providing level boarding,
eliminating the complicated boarding process for disabled Hamiltonians and
giving them the dignity of entering like everyone else.  Have you ever stepped
onto a bus and been pitched into the ground (or into a stranger) by a sudden
acceleration or deceleration?  LRTs smoothly accelerate and have a dedicated ROW
free from unexpected traffic.  I mean, how can we ask Hamiltonians to stop
driving so much when we offer them vehicles that feel and sound like they're
about to shake themselves to pieces?  I invite you to sit at the back of an
artic with poorly-secured maintenance hatches, you will not be able to hear your
own headphones, much less a conversation.

Yes, these sound like luxuries.  So do sidewalks, to some people.  If you want
somebody who can afford a downtown parking spot and a fancy car to ride transit,
a little luxury might be necessary. I've heard poverty-activists decry the LRT
as a middle-class toy... and I say that's actually pretty fair.  Because getting
middle-class people into transit is actually part of the point of this venture.
Without middle-class people on transit, transit will always be seen as a poverty
service, and you councilfolk will never be able to get buy-in from your
residents for real improvements since they'll see transit as an "other people
problem".

And as for those who want BRT and better service to other parts of the city - I
do too!  But we don't have plans for that ready, or $3.4 billion dollars on the
table on offer for any of that.  You want to draft up a plan for an A-line and a
T-line, I'll support it!  You want to raise my taxes for better transit, do that
(but also do some zoning changes so that you can get more taxpayers into these
new corridors because otherwise that's not a long-term strategy)!  But either
way, none of those plans are ready right now.  The LRT is.  And the province and
federal government are here to support it.  The federal government in general
and Hamilton's own Ms McKenna in particular have stuck their necks out for us,
and you want to strangle that neck?

This is our chance to build a greater, greener Hamilton.  The world is starting
to embrace this kind of green infrastructure, and we can't afford to be left
behind.  And if the world doesn't embrace green infrastructure like this...
well, I'd like to be able to explain to my grandkids one day that we *tried* to
stop climate change here in Hamilton.

I'm sorry I wrote such a long letter, I didn't have the time for a short one.  I
assume none of you have read this verbose mess in its entirety, particularly
since I'm sure it's one of many, but I thank you for whatever time you've given
me.

Regards,

Martin Zarate

Ward 1 resident