---
published: published 
layout: post 
category: Politics
title: Birdsite
---

On the birdsite: Musk's policy changes were about "Free Speech"... but it's
become extremely clear that the particular speech he was focused on liberating
was transphobia.  Most of the accounts he unbanned were banned for anti-trans
hate-speech, and he's since gotten very chummy with notorious anti-trans
extremists on Twitter. He's also tweeted anti-trans stuff himself.

It's hard to avoid that detail -- when he says he bought twitter for "free
speech", its important to ask "about what?".

---

<!--excerpt-->

As a person with trans family, this is a deal-breaker for me, and I'd hope for
many others.  Many artists I follow have exited for the same reason, often in
spectacularly pyrotechnic fashions, [such as the QuestionableContent comic artist
Jeph Jacques](https://www.cbc.ca/radio/day6/elon-musk-twitter-impersonations-1.6648071).

So, I'm really hoping this Mastodon thing takes off.

---
I know some people are going to other social networks like Tumblr, Hive, and
Post.... but fundamentally, what's to stop their owners from ruining those sites
too? Tumblr in particular already had an exodus because of bad moderation once
before.

People have complained that Mastodon's governance model is like an HOA. Each
server is a private nation with complicated political relationships to other
servers. That's bad... but is a new hopefully-benevolent dictator better?

---

Mastodon is flawed.  It's confusing, it's overloaded, and it's questionable how
fiscally sound its servers are.  But Twitter's Muskpocalypse has proven how
governance is important.  And Mastodon gives people the tools to care about
governance.  We can emigrate to new servers. We can build our own servers that
can be run as we see fit.  We can modify the code of our server. Nobody *owns*
the Fediverse network Mastodon's servers run on.

If Twitter's moderation matters, then ownership matters.

---

I'm at [@Pxtl@Mastodon.Social](https://mastodon.social/@Pxtl)